First draft of FIP-0074: Remove cron-based automatic deal settlement (#805)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-market-no-cron.md

---
fip: "<to be assigned>"
title: Remove cron-based automatic deal settlement
author: "Alex North (@anorth), Alex Su (@alexytsu)"
discussions-to: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/800
status: Draft
type: Technical
category: Core
created: 2023-08-24
---

## Simple Summary

> Add a method to the built-in market actor to allow storage providers to settle deals manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a method to the built-in market actor to allow storage providers to settle deal payments manually.
```

Stop performing automatic deal settlement in the built-in market actor's cron handler.
This removes risk that cron-based deal settlement work will overtake the chain's processing capacity.

## Abstract
Filecoin tipset execution includes a facility for scheduled execution of actor code at the end of every epoch. 
This "cron" activity has a real validation cost, which can be accounted in gas units, but is not paid for by any party 
(no tokens are burnt as a gas fee).

The built-in storage market actor uses cron at every epoch to perform maintenance
(mainly the settlement of payments) for active deals.

> Since this work is "free" to the beneficiaries, it is essentially a subsidised service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this work is "free" to the beneficiaries (deal clients and storage providers), it is essentially a subsidised service.
```

The cost of this level of service is unsustainable, and threatens chain progress if utilisation grows. 
Similar subsidised service cannot be made available to user-programmed smart contracts, 
reducing their competitiveness as storage applications or markets.

> This proposal instead provides a method for storage providers to settle deals manually, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This proposal instead provides a method for storage providers to settle deal payments manually, 
```

and disables the automatic settlement for new deals.
Existing deals continue to be settled automatically until they expire.

## Change Motivation
A fast and predictable tipset validation time is important to the ability of validating nodes 
to sync the chain quickly (especially when catching up), 
and critical for block producers to be able to produce new blocks for timely inclusion. 
Cron currently accounts for more than half of the computational cost of tipset validation,

> and the built-in market actor's use a significant proportion of that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the built-in market actor uses a significant proportion of that.
```

> Although there is significant buffer in target tipset validation times to account for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although there is a significant buffer in the target tipset validation times to account for 
```

extended cron execution can threaten chain quality and minimum hardware specs for validators.

Cron is very convenient for some maintenance operations,
but is essentially a subsidy from the network to whichever actors get the free execution (which is only ever built-in actors). 
Subsidised, automatic daily settlement of deals is far from the kind of critical network service for which cron was intended, 
and of zero value for the 98% of deals today that have zero fee.

The number of deals brokered by the built-in market has increased greatly over the past year. 
There are currently about 45 million active deals (~520 deals per epoch), a number which is growing quickly.

The processing cost of this maintenance nearly caused disaster prior to FIP-0060, 
which extended each deal's update period from 24 hours to 30 days.
However, this change only bought some time to design a more permanent solution.
There remains significant risk that this processing could grow beyond the ability of the chain to safely execute it.

### Impact of direct data onboarding
A concurrent proposal is to support skipping the built-in storage market actor for some data onboarding, 

> which provides a cost reduction for arrangements that don’t need payments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which provides a cost reduction for arrangements that don’t need on-chain payments. 
```

As this capability is implemented and adopted, the number of built-in market deals might decrease 
even as total data onboarding increases.
If and when adopted, this would mitigate the risk significantly. 

> However, this benefit depends on participants' adoption of new methods, which is uncertain. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, this benefit depends on participants' adoption of the new data onboarding flow, which is uncertain. 
```

The built-in market actor might in any case be host a large number of payment-bearing deals.
Thus, direct data onboarding cannot be relied upon in either the near- or long-term as a final solution.

## Specification

> Today, at the end of each epoch, the market actor loads all deals that are scheduled for maintenance.

Reviewer: Are payments for early terminated deals also settled in market cron (payment refund to clients)?

For each deal, the function:
- removes state for any unactivated deals that have timed out (“expired”);
- settles incremental payments for activated deals; and
- removes state for any completed or terminated deals.

This proposal is to provide a new, explicit user message to settle payments, 
and provide an explicit method to settle deals.
Cron is still used to time out un-activated deals.

### Explicit deal settlement
A new `SettleDealPayments` method is added to the built-in storage market actor.
This may be invoked by a storage provider (or anyone on their behalf) to settle
incremental payments for a specified list of deals.
Settling the final payment for a completed deal also removes the deal metadata from state.

```
// Note transparent serialization for single-item struct.
struct SettleDealPaymentsParams {
    Deals: []DealID,
}

struct SettleDealPaymentsReturn {
    // Indicators of success or failure for each deal.
    Results: {
        SuccessCount: u32,

>         FailCods: []{

Reviewer: what does `Cod` stands for?

            Index: u32,
            ExitCode: ExitCode,
        },
    }
    // Results for those deals that successfully settled.
    Settlements: []DealSettlementSummary,
}

struct DealSettlementSummary {
    // Incremental amount paid to the provider.
    Payment: TokenAmount,
    // Whether the deal has settled for the final time.
    Completed: bool,

> }

Reviewer 2: Clarifying: 

A provider could specify a deal whose proposal is expired (not activated in time). Would this be considered an error? If an error, USR_NOT_FOUND is probably most suitable as ExitCode though perhaps could use USR_ILLEGAL_ARGUMENT or a custom market-defined ExitCode.

This proposal will change terminations to be synchronous. So we do not need to handle terminated deals apart from in some bootstrap cases where a deal is already scheduled for cleanup but has not been processed in cron yet. However, it is possible that a SP specifies such a deal in a call to `SettleDealPayments`. I think in this case, it should appear in the return value as a successful deal that completed.

Reviewer 2: This proposal will change terminations to be synchronous. So we do not need to handle terminated deals apart from in some bootstrap cases where a deal is already scheduled for cleanup but has not been processed in cron yet. However, it is possible that a SP specifies such a deal in a call to `SettleDealPayments`. I think in this case, it should appear in the return value as a successful deal that completed.

Alternatively, we could make specifying a terminated deal illegal, return an error code and fail the entire batch. This would allow the actor code to immediately simplify and not need to account for terminated deals (sending funds to burnt actor etc.)

Author: > A provider could specify a deal whose proposal is expired (not activated in time).

Yes, similarly they could specify a deal that already terminated or completed. These are errors _for that particular deal_, but should not abort the whole call. I think `USR_NOT_FOUND` is fine, there is precedent for this already in the actor code for loading deals from state.

Author: > we could make specifying a terminated deal illegal, return an error code and fail the entire batch.

Great idea, let's take this simplification.

```

### Synchronous clean-up on termination
The existing built-in market actor `OnMinerSectorsTerminate` method is changed to 
synchronously make a final payment settlement, charge penalties, and clean up state.
It behaves as if `SettleDealPayments` was invoked immediately after marking deals as terminated.
This replaces the current technique of merely recording the termination epoch and then 
waiting for cron to do the work.

### No automatic settlement for new deals
When a deal is first published, it is added to the cron queue after its start epoch. 
If it is not activated prior to that epoch, it is expired and cleaned up in cron. 
This remains as it works today.

However, when the cron handler finds deal to have been newly-activated (i.e. has not been settled previously),
it is _not_ re-scheduled for subsequent automatic settlement.
Future settlements must be manual.

> ### Continued automatic settlement for existing deals

Reviewer: How will early terminated deals that would yield refund to client be settled?

Author: This is specified above in `Synchronous clean-up on termination`.

Deals that are already activated prior to this change continue to be settled automatically in cron.

## Design Rationale
An explicit settlement message aligns the gas cost of settling payments with the party deriving the benefit.
It also bounds the cost, like most other state transitions, by the block gas limit.

> Providers might settle payments quite infrequently,

Reviewer: can we have a TODO to get an estimation of whats the max. # of the deal payment a single message can safely do & how much gas it might cost?

Author: The gas cost will imply the maximum (from block gas limit). 

This kind of thing is very difficult to estimate. I will have to ask the Lotus team to do it, as they're the only ones with the mainnet state and tooling to execute messages against it. Do you have a mainnet-clone network for such work?

Author: I have made an estimate based on a cron trace, which performs similar work. I will add this to incentive considerations.

reflecting the relatively low utility of doing so, and will prefer periods of low gas demand.
Less frequent updates result in a lower system-wide amount of computation performed.

Storage providers are not expected to invoke settlement for deals that carry no payment.

> The metadata for such newly-created but no-payment deals will thus remain in state indefinitely.

Reviewer: Can we expose any way to clean them up, like compact partitions?

Author: The method to clean up _is_ `SettleDealPayments`. But they'll never call it.

> However, with direct data onboarding, there is little benefit and some cost to

Reviewer: editor 🤔 : Im not sure if we should discard a potential negative impact based on the assumption some future FIP will be accepted.

Author: This is a valid technical concern which you should raise in the discussion thread. It's not an editorial item.

Author: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/800#discussioncomment-6928755

involving the built-in market actor in new unpaid deals.
Relatively few additional unpaid deals might be accumulated after that is possible.
Stale blockchain state poses a much lesser risk to blockchain execution than continual processing.
If a large amount does accumulate, it could be dealt with independently.

Since no _new_ deals are scheduled for automatic settlement, 
the cron cost of settlement will gradually decline until there are no active deals scheduled.
At that point, a future simplification can remove the code for automatic payment settlement from the cron handler.
The scheme proposed involves no state migration.

> Since sector termination may be invoked by the miner actor’s cron handler,

Reviewer: https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/discussions/800#discussioncomment-6819100

If the caller specifies a deal which has expired (not activated in time) or already terminated or completed,
settlement fails with the `USR_NOT_FOUND` exit code (regardless of whether cron has removed the deal proposal from state).

### Immediate clean-up on termination
The existing built-in market actor `OnMinerSectorsTerminate` method is changed to 
immediately make a final payment settlement, charge penalties, and clean up state.
It behaves as if `SettleDealPayments` was invoked immediately after marking deals as terminated.
This replaces the current technique of merely recording the termination epoch and then 
waiting for cron to do the work.

### No automatic settlement for new deals
When a deal is first published, it is added to the cron queue after its start epoch. 
If it is not activated prior to that epoch, it is expired and cleaned up in cron. 
This remains as it works today.

However, when the cron handler finds deal to have been newly-activated (i.e. has not been settled previously),
it is _not_ re-scheduled for subsequent automatic settlement.
Future settlements must be manual.

### Continued automatic settlement for existing deals

> Deals that are already activated prior to this change continue to be settled automatically in cron.

Reviewer 3: What happens when someone calls `SettleDealPayments` on already activated deal?

Author: Manual settlement of existing deals should also succeed and make the expected payments and state updates. I will add this.

However, with direct data onboarding, there is little benefit and some cost to
involving the built-in market actor in new unpaid deals.
Relatively few additional unpaid deals might be accumulated after that is possible.
Stale blockchain state poses a much lesser risk to blockchain execution than continual processing.
If a large amount does accumulate, it could be dealt with independently.

Since no _new_ deals are scheduled for automatic settlement, 
the cron cost of settlement will gradually decline until there are no active deals scheduled.
At that point, a future simplification can remove the code for automatic payment settlement from the cron handler.
The scheme proposed involves no state migration.

Since sector termination may be invoked by the miner actor’s cron handler,
this will sometimes still do settlement work in cron.
This may be resolved by future changes to reduce miner actor's use of cron for terminations.
Explicit sector termination by the SP will account for the cost of settlement to their gas usage.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal does not remove or change any exported APIs, nor change any state schemas.

> It is backwards compatible for all callers.

Reviewer 3: I created an issue in actors: https://github.com/filecoin-project/builtin-actors/issues/1399

The SlashEpoch in get_deal_activation is an unreliable source of information right now. If people rely on it today, it this FIP might cause issues.

> It is backwards compatible for all callers.

Author: Thanks, I'll add a note about this to the section in immediate clean-up on termination.

---

> fip: "<to be assigned>"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
fip: "0074"
```
